[docs] Add a guide on How to build a config plugin and an Expo module (#21024)
expo/expo: docs/pages/modules/config-plugin-and-native-module-tutorial.mdx

Config plugins allow you to customize native iOS and Android projects when they are generated with `npx expo prebuild`. This is often useful to add properties in native config files, to copy assets to native projects, and even for advanced configurations such as adding an app extension target. As an app developer, this can be useful to apply customizations that are not exposed in the default **app.json** configuration. As a library author, this allows you to automatically configure native projects for the developers using your library.

In this guide, we will walk you through the process of creating a new config plugin from scratch, and show you how to read custom values injected into **AndroidManifest.xml** and **Info.plist** by your plugin from an Expo module.

## 1. Initialize a module

Let's start a new project using `create-expo-module` which will initialize a new Expo module project with scaffolding for iOS, Android, and TypeScript, along with an example project to interact with the module from within an app. You can do that by running the following command:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx create-expo-module expo-native-configuration']} />

> In this guide we will use the name `expo-native-configuration`/`ExpoNativeConfiguration` but you can name it whatever you like.

Author: Sounds good to me, and yeah `expo-native-configuration`/`ExpoNativeConfiguration` is the name of the module we're creating

> In this guide we will use the name `expo-native-configuration`/`ExpoNativeConfiguration` but you can name it whatever you like.

Reviewer: Thanks! I just made a little update to add that context 😄

## 2. Set up our workspace

In our example we won't need the view module included by `create-expo-module`, so we can clean up the default module a little bit with the following command:

<Terminal
  cmdCopy="cd expo-native-configuration && rm ios/ExpoNativeConfigurationView.swift && rm android/src/main/java/expo/modules/nativeconfiguration/ExpoNativeConfigurationView.kt && rm src/ExpoNativeConfigurationView.tsx src/ExpoNativeConfiguration.types.ts && rm src/ExpoNativeConfigurationView.web.tsx src/ExpoNativeConfigurationModule.web.ts"
  cmd={[
    '$ cd expo-native-configuration',
    '$ rm ios/ExpoNativeConfigurationView.swift',
    '$ rm android/src/main/java/expo/modules/nativeconfiguration/ExpoNativeConfigurationView.kt',
    '$ rm src/ExpoNativeConfigurationView.tsx src/ExpoNativeConfiguration.types.ts',
    '$ rm src/ExpoNativeConfigurationView.web.tsx src/ExpoNativeConfigurationModule.web.ts',
  ]}
/>

> We also need to find the following files and replace them with the provided minimal boilerplate:

Author: Using full file paths makes it a bit hard to read, what do you think about only specifying the file name?
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11707729/216446658-b4a07b67-32d0-46bd-abc0-f0448004ae39.png)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11707729/216446900-e9223cc0-8dae-4124-b2fa-524f80d23511.png)

Something like 
```suggestion
We also need to find **ExpoNativeConfigurationModule.swift**, **ExpoNativeConfigurationModule.kt**, **src/index.ts** and **example/App.tsx** and replace them with the provided minimal boilerplate:
```

> We also need to find the following files and replace them with the provided minimal boilerplate:

Reviewer: Yeah, in this case, the file names are fine!

## 4. Creating a new config plugin

With all that set up, we can now start developing our new config plugin. Plugins are synchronous functions that accept an `ExpoConfig` and return a modified `ExpoConfig`. By convention, these functions are prefixed by the word `with` , and in this guide, we will name our plugin `withMyApiKey` — however, you can name it whatever you like, as long as it follows this pattern.

Here is an example of what a basic config plugin function would look like:

```javascript
const withMyApiKey = config => {
  return config;
};
```

Additionally, you can use `mods`, async functions that modify native project files, such as source code or configuration (plist, xml) files. The `mods` object is different from the rest of the Expo config because it doesn't get serialized after the initial reading, this means you can use it to perform actions *during* code generation.

With that said there are a few considerations that we should follow when writing config plugins:

- Plugins should be synchronous and their return value should be serializable, except for any `mods` that are added.

> - `plugins` are always invoked when the config is read by the `expo/config` method `getConfig`. However, `mods` are only invoked during the "syncing" phase of `npx expo prebuild`.

Author: `@expo/config` is a library for interacting with **app.json** and `expo/config` is a fixed version on `@expo/config` shipped with the `expo` package.

> - `plugins` are always invoked when the config is read by the `expo/config` method `getConfig`. However, `mods` are only invoked during the "syncing" phase of `npx expo prebuild`.

Reviewer: Ah okay. My bad, I didn't recognize that.

> Although not required, we can use [`expo-module-scripts`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/expo-module-scripts) to make plugin development easier — it provides a recommended default configuration for TypeScript and Jest. Refer to the [config plugins guide](https://github.com/expo/expo/tree/main/packages/expo-module-scripts#-config-plugin) for more information.

Author: Yeah, I think a callout makes sense here because even though `expo-module-scripts` is included by default when using `create-expo-module`, it is not required for developing expo plugins

> Let's start by creating our plugin with this minimal boilerplate. This will create a **plugin** folder where we will write our plugin in TypeScript and add a **app.plugin.js** file in the project root which will be the entry file for the plugin.

Author: Yes

1. Create a **plugin/tsconfig.json** file

   ```json plugin/tsconfig.json
   {
     "extends": "expo-module-scripts/tsconfig.plugin",
     "compilerOptions": {
       "outDir": "build",
       "rootDir": "src"
     },
     "include": ["./src"],
     "exclude": ["**/__mocks__/*", "**/__tests__/*"]
   }
   ```

2. Create a **plugin/src/index.ts** file for our plugin

   ```typescript plugin/src/index.ts
   import { ConfigPlugin } from 'expo/config-plugins';

   const withMyApiKey: ConfigPlugin = config => {
     console.log('my custom plugin');
     return config;
   };

   export default withMyApiKey;
   ```

3. Finally, create an **app.plugin.js** file in the root directory. That will configure the entry file for our plugin

   ```javascript app.plugin.js
   module.exports = require('./plugin/build');
   ```

> With that set, we can already run `npm run build plugin` to start the TypeScript compiler in watch mode. The only thing left to configure is our example project to use our plugin. We can achieve this by adding the following line to the **example/app.json** file.

Author: You're right, we need them to run this command at this point

```json example/app.json
{
  "expo": {
    ...
    "plugins": ["../app.plugin.js"]
  }
}
```

> Now when running `npx expo prebuild` inside our **example** folder we should see our 'my custom plugin’ console.log statement in the terminal.

Author: The `npm run build plugin` command has to be run before `npx expo prebuild --clean`, but it doesn't really matter if it's run before or after adding the `example/app.json`file

> Now when running `npx expo prebuild` inside our **example** folder we should see our 'my custom plugin’ console.log statement in the terminal.

Reviewer: right now, it reads like that `npm run build plugin` has to run twice. Once before the code snippet of `example/app.json` and once after when going through line 189. I'd suggest that either re-phrase line `176` in a way that the developer runs both commands after modifying `app.json` or modify the `Terminal` (line 189) component to just run `npx expo prebuild --clean` and keep the text before the `app.json` as it is.

> Now when running `npx expo prebuild` inside our **example** folder we should see our 'my custom plugin’ console.log statement in the terminal.

Author: I agree, I updated it now to no longer include `npm run build plugin` on line 189, I think this helps the reader to understand that these 2 commands are independent and don't need to be run together.

> Now when running `npx expo prebuild` inside our **example** folder we should see our 'my custom plugin’ console.log statement in the terminal.

Reviewer: Thank you!

    );
    return config;
  });

  return config;
};
```

By merging everything into a single function, we can create our custom plugin. The final code would look like this:

```typescript plugin/src/index.ts
import {
  withInfoPlist,
  withAndroidManifest,
  AndroidConfig,
  ConfigPlugin,
} from 'expo/config-plugins';

const withMyApiKey: ConfigPlugin<{ apiKey: string }> = (config, { apiKey }) => {
  config = withInfoPlist(config, config => {
    config.modResults['MY_CUSTOM_API_KEY'] = apiKey;
    return config;
  });

  config = withAndroidManifest(config, config => {
    const mainApplication = AndroidConfig.Manifest.getMainApplicationOrThrow(config.modResults);

    AndroidConfig.Manifest.addMetaDataItemToMainApplication(
      mainApplication,
      'MY_CUSTOM_API_KEY',
      apiKey
    );
    return config;
  });

  return config;
};

export default withMyApiKey;
```

Now with the plugin ready to be used we can update the example app to pass our API key to the plugin. To do so we need to update the following line on **example/app.json**

```json example/app.json
{
  "expo": {
    ...
    "plugins": [["../app.plugin.js", { "apiKey": "custom_secret_api" }]]
  }
}
```

> This tells the example app to use our custom plugin, and passes in the API key as a configuration option.

Reviewer: Forgot to ad before, if we decide to add the context in the line before the snippet, we can remove this one.

> This tells the example app to use our custom plugin, and passes in the API key as a configuration option.

Author: yeah makes sense, removed it.
